Notice window
  welcome
  scenario descriptions
  warnings

zone status window
  display live map picture
  reconfigure to support various tasks
  editors for chaging zone
  invest $ => develop zone => increase land value
  population density
  crime prevention
  environmental cleanup
  enance growth

editor
  pie menus
  demand gauge

budget
  multi user dialog
  hour glass timeout
  auto budget toggle
  pause/resume toggle (to allow changing budget while simulation is running)

map
  drag rectangles to pan map views
  menus on palette
  generate terrain mode
  lengend
  rearrange
  switch overlays
  dynamic zone finder

graph
  2x3 palelet, 10/120 years
  double buffering
  communicate data. ard wire in c? 

evaluation
  historical graphis?

surveyor
  other editors

dynamic zone finder
  washboard filter sliders

get key dialog

new city -- or "use map"?
  name, level
  scenario selection
  random terrain generator
  player can propose a city by selecting a scenario, loading a city, or generating a random terrain. 
  all players must vote unanimously on a city to play
  selecting a new city clears all votes
  players can press next/previous to page through proposed city history
    you can go back to randomly generated terrains, because it saves the random number generator seed
    clears votes, proposes new or old city
  terrain editor todo:
    Integrate terrain editor code into map editor, 
    and have a button on the new city map to run in terrain editor mode.
    Terrain editor will include only terrain editing tools,
    plus random terrain generation interface,
    and simulator will be paused.

print dialog
  Newspaper printing and publishing metaphore. 

  Optionally save a snapshot of the city state, to link to from the newspaper article. 

  Publish in newspaper, print on paper, save to disk, copy to clipboard, 
  add to journal, blog, etc.

  Allow user to enter text to be printed along with an image, like blogging. 
  Can print any map or editor view with data overlay and chalk drawings, 
  entire map (fit on one page, or split across multiple pages), 
  or other windows like graph, evaluation, notices, messages, chat log, etc. 

  Export text content as html with embedded images. 

  Make an html/image city overview and journal, like The Sims family view and scrapbook. 

  Printable windows and views should have a "print" button or function that pops up a 
  pie menu of possible destinations, for quickly making snapshots in your journal, etc.

  Publish illustrated newspapers in the game, like The Sims storybook, with newspaper 
  articles composed of pictures of the city, text excerpts from chat logs, etc. 

  A player could be a "reporter" interviewing other player politicians via chat,
  before and after the vote on building a stadium, asking them to make their case for
  or against the stadium, and publish the interviews in the game's newspaper, the
  "Micropolis Journal".

  Players can browse each others newspapers over the net, and download the city snapshots 
  the articles write about. 

  Flash: Monster invades Micropolis, near nuclear reactor! 
  (story and link to saved city so you can read the story, then bring up the city and 
  play it live from the point the story was written)

quit
  confirm
  multi player logout

save dialog

load dialog

network city browsing and sharing
  "What-If?" history tree.
  Publish your cities on the net.
  Download other peoples cities.
  Use a URL to point to a saved city. 
  Grab a live snapshot of somebody's running city.
  Checkpoint and branch timelines.
  Save a city back to the point where it branched, 
  to create an alternate history that other players can load.
  Multiple players build a tree of saved cities with branching alternate histories.
    Like the parallel universes in Niven's All the Myriad Ways.
  Rewind any city up the tree and select available alternate histories at each branch point. 
  Play back alternate histories edit by edit, stop them at any point and take over, 
  making a new branch point at that location.
  When you play together in the same city, you have to discuss and agree with other players 
  about what to do, and convince other people of your ideas.
  You can try an idea out yourself, by branching your own private history, 
  giving your idea a try, and reporting back to the other players in the main shared timeline
  what happened (with links to the save file and history so other players can see for themselves). 
  GUI: Branching history tree outline viewer of saved files. 
  Drag and drop a history point into the chat log which other players can click on to open a 
  live view playing that history. 

status control
  views
  players
  new player
  new view

Keep and export logs of simulation values
  r, c, i demand
  evaluation
  tax rate, collected
  funds
  funding levels
  event logs
    simulation events
      extend simulator to log all interesting simulation events, 
      so newspaper reporters can write stories about them
    editing commands
      Log enough information to replay all edits against a save file to recreate same city.
      This is the key to high level multi player protocol between
      multiple parallel lock-step simulations, like The Sims Online,
      better than using low level x11 to implement the multi player
      interface)
      Treat any editing command as a "what-if" branch point where it could go another way.
      Give players an easy interface to replay a simulation up to a branch point, and 
      and re-make the decision, to see how it would turn out differently. 
  chat logs
  everything else of course
  web service to access logs
  export logs as xml for programs or csv for spreadsheets
  import and export chalk overlay as vector drawing
  support image overlays with transparency (begs for photoshop-like drawing interface)?
    Careful how far down that road you go, because you could use it to paint the image of
    a happy emerald green city over a dreary industrial wasteland. 
    The simple white chalk overlay has the advantage that you always know what's chalk and what's not. 
  opml outline with geo-codes
    store city overlay information in opml
    register the corners of the map with real-world lat/long values
      allow rotation and scaling but not arbitrary shearing or distortion
    register nodes of the opml outline at lat/long points and areas on the map
      what's a good way to associate an opml node with an arbitrary area on the map? 
      an attribute with a polygon in lat/long coordinates?
      a list of rectangles in lat/long coordinates?
      a list of tiles in row/col coordinates?
    associate geo-coded opml nodes with features on the map like 
    zones, buildings, streets, neighborhoods
      use opml nodes to give names to features, 
	take notes about them, 
	attach pictures to them,
	write stories about them,
      support overlapping features, so roads can cross, 
      and each tile can belong to any number of features.
    allow users to plant signs on the map, like micropolis 2000. 
      represent signs with an opml node. 
        signs can contains arbitrary opml outlines
          with links to other opml nodes
	    like a sign at a crossroad, linked to the nodes representing each road, 
	    and the regions of the city that the roads bring you to.
      use opml to write a city guide
      attach chalk overlays and signs to opml nodes so you can show and hide them hierarchically

head window
  Represents root window of Micropolis application to TCL, and ties all the other windows together. 
  Contains the application's main menus and scrolling message and chat log.

  An artifact of the way TCL/Tk/X11 works. 

  With another gui, might be the main base window that contains all other subwindows. 

  In X11, we depend on the user's chosen X11 window manager to manage all the separate windows. 

  In a better world (Sugar) Micropolis should let users save and restore windows
  configurations and multiple views, tailored for various roles and tasks. 

  When a new player joins, the select a role to play, which will grant them 
  permissions and customize the interface, opening and positioning the appropriate
  windows and tools for their role. 

  Each role supports various tasks that might themselves reconfigure the user interface. 

  User interface configurations should be selected based on the role and the task. 

  Users first select a role that stays the same (forever or most of the time) 
  and which grants them a set of permissions. 

  Each role supports a set of tasks (like Eclipse's "aspects"), which users may
  switch between, to reconfigure the user interface. 

  Players can hold elections to grant each other roles 
  (like mayor, treasurer, planner, builder, reporter, god, etc).

Ownershop

  This vastly complicates the game, so I didn't try it, but I wrote down some ideas.

  Consider the screen area of the user interface it would require to 
  enable the user to micro-manage all the ownership issues, in terms of 
  the number of acres of city map it would cover. 

  It seemed like it would be too complicated to be fun. 

  Even if it could be magically implemented with a simple gui, would it be any fun? 

  That said, here are some ideas. 

  Ownership plane: 0 => nobody, 1-256 => user id 
    (note: Can't save ownership user ids into save files if we want multiple  
    players to enter and exit independently from the city itself, or if we
    want to support an open-ended, possibly large number of players over time. 
    As I said, this gets complicated pretty fast, without a lot of beneficial fun.)

  Players have separate funds. 
    This raises issues about: who gets paid how much of the city's overall income,
    and who pays for city services?

    Could have a main shared city budget, then certain players can be appropriated 
    funds from that budget earmarked to perform various tasks.
    But again, that gets pretty complicated, and how is it fun? 

  Competition or cooperation?
    Should we attempt to make the game support competition between players,
    or is it better to keep it cooperation-oriented, by requiring unanimous votes,
    sharing the budget, etc. 

    I think it's simpler and more educational to give players the freedom to misbehave, 
    while building in social networking and accountability, to let players discuss, 
    negotiate, make and break deals, establish reputations, reward good behavior, 
    and punish bad behavior, by developing real-world social interaction skills. 

    What fun would politics be if you couldn't have scandals? 

  Land value
    higher resolution land value grid
    effected by sales

  asking price
    Tiles are owned by someone, and may be for sale, and given an asking price by the owner.
      Requires complex user interface for selecting tiles, assigning price, etc. 
      How is that fun? 
    Groups of tiles: parcels of land, for sale all at once, to highest bidder. 
      M.U.L.E.-like multi player auctions for land.
    Developers can build on empty tiles that are for sale, and they're bought automatically. 
      What's so fun about being a developer? Nothing to do after setting the price of the land. 
    Buyers can offer to buy something that doesn't have a price, which initiates an 
    M.U.L.E. dialog with the owner, and allows other players to join in the auction, 
    submitting their own bids. 

  Transaction tool - $ (or local currency symbol)
    select group of cells
  negitiate deals with the owners
  automatically calculates default land value suggested price (upon which the tax rate based) 
    based on modified land value through worth

  communication window
    so people can negotiate and talk
    irc-like chat rooms where people can have a side discussion
    private person-to-person messages

  calculate evaluation for each player
    Independent and combined scores and statistics.
    Hard to define what this means in terms of the current simulation.
    Would have to deeply change the way the simulation works,
    but then would it still be fun?

  Zone ownership.
    Develop Micropolis into a more Monopoly-like game: SimCitopoly.
    A player can own power plants and other utilities, and makes money
    by selling electricity and other services to other players. 
    Zones don't develop until someone buys them.
    Own residential => collect rent, pay maintainence. 
    Own industrial, commercial => collect income, pay expenses.
    All zone owners pay taxes.
